! This automatically generated by pandoc from pdf file please checkout the pdf [report](https://github.com/iboraham/local-feature-matching/blob/master/docs/local_feature_matching.pdf) for better reading experience

---
author:
- Ibrahim Onur Serbetci
bibliography:
- bibliography.bib
date: 16/02/2021
title: Local Feature Matching
---

# Introduction

Images can be matched by their features. These features can be often
described with specific locations such as peaks, corners, edges.
Therefore, the features can be used for matching these features from
different images. In this report, these features have called corner
points. Local feature matching pipeline consists of three main steps
which are interest point detection, feature description and feature
matching.

# Interest Point Detection

For detecting interesting point two algorithm has implemented:

Harris Corner Detection

Adaptive Non-Maximal Suppression (ANMS)

## Harris Corner Detection

Harris corner detector is a corner detection algorithm introduced by
Chris Harris and Mike Stephens in 1988 [@harris1988combined]. The
implemented algorithm uses the Sobel operator to convolve image beyond
both x and y axes after applying grey and Gaussian filter on the image.
In this context, the auto-correlation function given below used to
ensure that the features detected are stable.

$$M=w\begin{bmatrix}I_x^2 & I_xI_y \\ I_xI_y & I_y^2\end{bmatrix}$$

The determinant of the auto-correlation matrix has used to calculate the
following cornerness function.

$$R=g(I_x^2)g(I^2_y)-[g(I_xI_y)]^2-\lambda[g(I_x^2)+g(I_y^2)]^2$$

Thus, the algorithm filter the image with Gaussian filter to ensure
avoiding from over-fitting. Then, uses Sobel operator to filter edges
beyond x and y axes and filter them with Gaussian filter again. This
will construct to auto-correlation matrix given as $M$. The algorithm
also uses the constant $\lambda$ to account for offsets that generally
lies between $\lambda \in[0.04:0.06]$.

## Adaptive Non-Maximal Suppression (ANMS)

After the implementation of the Harris corner detector we have $R$
matrix which contains cornerness score pixel by pixel. The algorithm
applies 3x3 local maximum filter to find local maximum and ignore other
ones. In this context, other than local maximums are encoded as 0. After
that, algorithm calculates non-zero mean of the local maximum values and
ignore values that are lower with the same technique. The algorithm is
calculates the adaptive radius for each corner candidates that has
survived from previous steps.

$$r_i= min_j|x_i-x_j| \; s.t. f(x_i) < f(x_j)c_{robust} \; f(x_j),x_j\in{I}$$

where $x_j$ is the candidate corner point, $x_i$ is the other point that
meets the criteria and $f$ is the function that returns cornerness score
of a point [@brown2005multi]. After finding the radius of the each
candidate, the algorithm sorts largest to smallest the corners according
to their radius and takes from the top $n$.

# Local Feature Description

Scale invariant feature transform (SIFT)

Adaptive Non-Maximal Suppression (ANMS)

## SIFT-like Feature Descriptor

For local description of each corner point from previous section, we
used a SIFT-like algorithm. Firstly, the algorithm applies Gaussian
filter and Sobel filter on the image with the parameters; $ksize=(3,3)$,
$\sigma = 0.5$. Then, calculates angles and magnitudes of each point
with the following formulas.

$$\theta_{x,y} = \tan^{-1}(I_y \div I_x),$$
$$m_{x,y} = \sqrt{I_x^2 + I_y^2}$$

The algorithm creates patches from hyper-parameter called feature width.
For each 4x4 pixels, algorithm has binned them into 8 bins. Each of
these bins represent 45 degrees.

::: {.center}
![Illustration of histogram binning in SIFT
[@sift]](The-SIFT-descriptor-generation-2.png){#sift_example
width="6cm"}
:::

As it can be seen in the Figure [1](#sift_example){reference-type="ref"
reference="sift_example"}, we have $8*16=128$ values to describe each
feature.

## SIFT with Multiple Scales

While detecting interest points and describing them, multiple scales has
been used. Image has resized with specific scales with several times. In
this context the pipeline should be able to more adaptive to different
scales of patches than one scaling.

# Feature Matching with Nearest Neighbor Distance Ration (NNDR)

The algorithm takes feature vectors and interest points' locations from
previous steps. Finds the distance between each point's feature vector.
Once it has all pair of the distance vector, it sorts ascending order
and select the two features that has lowest distance. In order to pick
best matches, algorithm limits the distances with certain threshold. The
algorithm computes the ratio between two lowest distances and limits
these ratios.

# Results and Discussion

Implementation of the Harris Corner Detector on the given 3 pair of
images with the sigma parameter. The sigma parameters are; 3, 0.5 and 5
in order. The results of the implementation of Harris corner detector is
in the Figure [4](#notre-harris){reference-type="ref"
reference="notre-harris"}.

::: {.center}
![Corners found with Harris Corner Detector and
ANMS.](notre_dame_harris.png "fig:"){#notre-harris width="10cm"}
![Corners found with Harris Corner Detector and
ANMS.](mt_rushmore_harris.png "fig:"){#notre-harris width="8cm"}
![Corners found with Harris Corner Detector and
ANMS.](eg_harris.png "fig:"){#notre-harris width="8cm"}
:::

After implementing interest point detector algorithms, local feature
descriptor can be implemented. The results from feature descriptor and
matching functions provided in Table
[1](#notre-table){reference-type="ref" reference="notre-table"}.

::: {#notre-table}
   ID      Image       Feature Width   Sigma   Regularizer   Norm. Desc.   Cheat Pts.   Accuracy
  ---- -------------- --------------- ------- ------------- ------------- ------------ ----------
   1     Notre Dame         16           3         No            No            No         93%
   2     Notre Dame         16           3         No            Yes           No         46%
   3     Notre Dame         16           3         No            No           Yes         78%
   4    Mt. Rushmore        44          0.5        No            No            No         99%
   5    Mt. Rushmore        44          0.5        No            Yes           No          6%
   6    Mt. Rushmore        44          0.5        No            No           Yes         62%
   7    Epis. Gaudi         36           5         Yes           No            No         16%
   8    Epis. Gaudi         36           5         Yes           Yes           No          5%
   9    Epis. Gaudi         36           5         Yes           No           Yes         11%

  : Result of pipeline implementation with different settings for top
  100 matches.
:::

The local feature matching pipeline that we have implemented, has
increased the accuracy score. As it can be seen in the Figure
[1](#notre-table){reference-type="ref" reference="notre-table"}, Notre
Dame score has increased from 46% to 93%, Mountain Rushmore has
increased from 6% to 99%, Episcopal Gaudi also has increased even from
5% to 16%. As an example, if we use SIFT-like self implemented method
instead of Normalized Patches method for Notre Dame, accuracy score will
be increased to 93% from 78%.

Sigma parameter is an important parameter to increase accuracy. The
sigma parameter that has used for each image pair is different. The main
purpose of the sigma is testing different blurring rate while applying
Gaussian or any other filtering. The sigma represents standard deviation
beyond x and y axes which means bigger sigma creates bigger blur in the
image. Therefore, we can say that sigma one of the tools for
regularization.

On the other hand, feature width parameter represents feature size of
the image. Also length of the feature vector is calculated by feature
width. Each image pair has used different feature width parameter which
are 16, 36 and 44. It can be inferred from here that Mountain Rushmore
images has needed to have bigger patch to create meaningful feature
vector.

As it can be seen in the Table [1](#notre-table){reference-type="ref"
reference="notre-table"}, the best result has achieved with IDs: 1, 4,
and 7. The most accurate matching occurred with Mt. Rushmore images -
99%. The second accurate is the Notre Dame with 93% accuracy score and
the best result of the Episcopal Gaudi 16%. Also, the visualization of
the best results' can be seen in the Figure
[7](#notre-result){reference-type="ref" reference="notre-result"}.

::: {.center}
![Visualization of the found best 100 matches for provided
images.](notre_dame.png "fig:"){#notre-result width="12cm"}
![Visualization of the found best 100 matches for provided
images.](mt_rushmore.png "fig:"){#notre-result width="10cm"}
![Visualization of the found best 100 matches for provided
images.](eg.png "fig:"){#notre-result width="10cm"}
:::
